Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
Philip Jose Farmer has been a mainstay science fiction writer since 1952.
He has written over 40 novels and over 80 short stories focusing on a wide variety of
subjects.
These range from Tarzan to the afterlife, from sex-crazed aliens to a star-faring Catholic
priest.
Farmer's most famous works are the River World series, The World of Tears series, his
erotic fantasy novels, and the story, later a novel, The Lovers.
We asked Farmer how he started writing science fiction.
I started reading science fiction when I was seven years old.
I'm 63 now.
And I knew I always wanted to be a writer.
Although I didn't do much about it for many years.
The funny thing is I actually intended to become a mainstream writer, that is, to write
stories which are not in particular genre.
But I somehow or other just drifted into science fiction and sold my first science fiction
story in 1952.
That was called The Lovers.
It was a novel that was published in a magazine, and it's generally credited with breaking
taboos against the mature use of sex in science fiction magazines.
We asked Farmer if he consciously set out to break taboos by writing The Lovers.
No, I had an idea for a story, and I couldn't write it unless I broke the taboos.
I didn't really consciously set out to do it because I had the idea, and I thought it
was terrific.
On the other hand, I knew I was going to have a lot of trouble getting accepted, and I did.
I did have a lot of trouble.
The first editor I sent it to, John Campbell, who was the editor of The Stounding, was the
most prestigious and highest paying market.
Naturally, I sent it to him first.
And he returned it with a comment that I'm not a editor.
I sent it to Horace Gold, who was editing Galaxy, which was equally prestigious and had
about the same word rates.
His comments were something like John Campbell's.
Then I sent it to Samuel Mayn, who was editor of a magazine called Starling Stories.
And he immediately accepted it and knew it was a revolutionary breakthrough.
He published it and I was on my way.
Accepted the next story I wrote was also equally revolutionary, and it took me a year before
I could get anybody to accept it.
Farmer is also interested in religion in its varied forms and has used it in his works.
My interest in religion has manifested itself throughout all my work.
Although a lot of people, when they say the name Farmer, immediately think of sex in both.
Fact is I've written much more about religion than about sex.
Or sometimes both at the same time.
Some in some respects.
Second religion are two sides of the same coin.
In certain fields of activity.
But religion is only one of many themes.
Farmer feels that he may have labored in relative anonymity for years because his writings are so varied,
but he has his reasons.
Tomorrow we continue with more on Philip Jose Farmer.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
We're continuing our interview with Philip Jose Farmer.
We want to explore here some background related to one of Farmer's major themes, religion.
As Farmer allowed earlier, he considers himself a writer of religious themes even more so than a writer of sexual themes.
His own religious background is quite checkered.
I was sent to Sunday school when I was very little and I became interested in the Bible and I read it on my own.
And I even read the Book of Mormon, which was about nine years old.
And I always wrestled all my life with the problems of immortality, predestination, grace, gastro-life and all that sort of stuff.
I was raised as a Christian scientist until the time I was about twelve.
And then I was sent to a Presbyterian church where there was a conflict between Christian science and the Presbyterian idea of predestination.
And then when I was about sixteen, I guess I became an atheist.
Now I've gone through atheism, through agnosticism, and then I was converted to the disciples of Christ.
And then I backslid, gone from grace, as the theological term goes.
And then I lapsed back into agnosticism.
And what are Farmer's present beliefs?
My present situation is that without immortality life has no meaning.
If there's a creation there must be a creator.
But I've come tremendously interested in what is sometimes referred to as myth.
And it isn't really like the Muslims, the Muslims Sufism school.
Then a lot of related stuff like that.
You might see right now I'm in a sort of limbo heading towards something I don't know what.
The concept of an afterlife appears repeatedly in Farmer's works.
Well, if you think about it, there could be a million different possibilities in an afterlife of their work.
But one of my perhaps unstated themes is that immortality may not depend upon a supernatural being.
It's in the evolutionary drive of man for him to invent immortality himself.
Well, the drawback to that is those people who are already dead will remain dead, right?
That doesn't correspond to the religious idea of immortality where everybody is raised from the first human being to the last one.
I like to do a lot of variations on that.
I have a new book called The Unraising Mask.
That's the quotation from Moby Dick.
And this is concerned with theology, afterlife, immortality.
You might call it a philosophical, theological space opera.
Many of Farmer's first works had the central theme of religion.
The lovers and a woman a day deal with a future amalgamation of church and state called the Sturge.
A popular character, Father John Carmody, is a planet hopping Catholic priest who has appeared in several short stories.
We learn about his former life and conversion in the excellent novel Night of Light.
Inside, Outside is a wild tale about the afterlife and immortality.
It is in fact the predecessor to the famous River World series, which we will discuss in our next show.
The Unraising Mask
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
Having looked into Philip Jose Farmer's feelings on religion and immortality, we began a look today at the River World series.
Farmer explains the basis of the story.
The main mystery behind the whole thing was why were all these people resurrected? Who did it and how?
But the River World concept is so big that Farmer's managed only to scratch the surface in the four main novels of the series.
There are so many themes that I wanted to explore during the course of those four novels, but I couldn't do it because I would have slowed the story down too much.
It wasn't taking too many sidetracks, you might say, and I'd still be working on that particular series.
What else is left? Listen to Farmer as he gives us an inkling of what he would like to cover.
I didn't go into any detail on how you could work out viable societies with people from every place and every time.
I also wanted to bring up in depth what would happen to famous people on that planet.
Carl Marx, for instance, what would he think of what happened to his ideas about communism on the planet Earth after he died?
Leonardo da Vinci, his ideas about art, plus the fact that he's on a planet where there are very few pigments available, for instance, for him to paint.
What would he do there?
I also wanted to bring up various figures from science and the military and philosophy and so forth, show what they would do there.
One of the things about the river world was that although you were resurrected there in a useful body of your own, as it was in 25, or earlier, if you died before 25,
if, for instance, you were 83 when you died and when your mind is still 83 and you have 83 years of experience on Earth behind you,
no, is your character formed? Are you going to go through perhaps a thousand years being the same person? Or are you going to improve?
And is the magic labyrinth the last word on the river world?
I made a lot of people mad at me. Because of that last sentence or your paragraph, I should say, I wrote in the magic labyrinth.
Everything seems to have been settled. Everything has been cleared up. And then one of the characters, the kind of minor one, Peter J. Striggett,
he's celebrating with the others in the misty tar when he thinks he hears a football outside in the hallway,
goes out, comes back, and says to the others, I didn't see anyone. It must have been my imagination.
A lot of readers got mad at me because they thought, oh no, he's going to write another one. He's leaving a loophole.
Well, I am leaving a loophole. I don't know whether I'll go through it or not.
But it's quite possible that the magic labyrinth wasn't the final one in that series before.
That everything that our protagonist learns and everybody else learns is quickly untrue or half-true.
So the river world novels may or may not be finished, but we do have some more side stream stories to anticipate.
More on Farmer tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show
So stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
Our show today continues the discussion with Philip Jose Farmer.
A major incident in Farmer's career began when Venus on the Half Shell, a novel written under the pseudonym Kilgore Trout,
appeared in the pages of fantasy and science fiction in late 74, early 75.
Of course, Kilgore Trout is the creation of author Kurt Vonnegut Jr.
The character Trout is an impoverished, underappreciated science fiction writer who appears in a number of Vonnegut's novels.
We asked Farmer if he identifies with Kilgore Trout.
We're being taken due to our inexperience with various publishers and agents.
Also, I had a tough time getting any recognition.
So I guess that's why I identified with him.
Most of the fact is he's a great character.
Vonnegut did not appreciate the reviews given Venus on the Half Shell, either pro or con,
because most of the reviewers approached the work as if Vonnegut were the author.
This cost Farmer the opportunity to write another novel under the Kilgore Trout pseudonym.
When I applied for permission to write The Son of Jimmy Valentine, which I really would have loved to,
I could have had a lot of fun with it, he said no, which is his prerogative.
We asked if The Son of Jimmy Valentine was Kilgore Trout's one erotic novel.
It was not only his one and only specifically erotic book, it was also his only non-science fiction book.
Farmer obviously enjoys writing about fictional authors who in turn write about their own fictional authors and so on.
Listen as he describes what writing as Kilgore Trout started.
In the Venus on the Half Shell, the protagonist, Simon Lagstaff, had his favorite science fiction author.
Just as in Vonnegut's books, Elliott Rose Water lost the Kilgore Trout,
the greatest living writer in any field.
He should have been president of the US, he couldn't have solved all the problems.
Well anyway, in Venus on the Half Shell, Simon Lagstaff liked to read the science fiction works of a fellow called Jonathan Swiss Summers the Third.
And I describe his various works as a Ralf item and give the titles.
But Jonathan Swiss Summers, who's a fictional author, wrote about a giant German shepherd police dog whose IQ had been raised to about 200 in a laboratory and he became a private detective.
Now, I plan eventually on writing a book by Ralf von Baubau, this dog, under the name Ralf von Baubau.
And then maybe I'll end the cycle by having Ralf von Baubau write about a human named Vonnegut or something like that and completing it, going right back to Vonnegut again.
Farmer conceded with the extended family group called the Vold Newton family in which many great historical and fictional characters are descended from the scarlet Pimpernel.
Thus Kilgore Trout is related to Sherlock Holmes, Doc Savage, Sam Spade and James Bond among others.
We will look into this aspect of Farmer's writing some more tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
This show will conclude our interview with Philip Jose Farmer.
Yesterday we discussed Farmer's pension for writing under pseudonyms, as it turns out this practice has a very desirable side effect.
One of the funny things about this is that I found out that I could use the fictional author device to break a writing block.
I had a writing block once, that terrible thing that sometimes happens to writers.
They don't know what caused this for some reason.
They might have many ideas, be eager to go, but when they sit down in front of a typewriter nothing happens.
Well, that happened to me once.
I never thought it would. I thought it was immune to such a thing.
But it did.
And after a wrestling for two months and getting no place, I had an idea.
I sat down with the typewriter and wrote a story, not by Philip Jose Farmer, but by David Copperfield, I'd say.
I don't remember which particular nominative.
The story poured out. Very good. I thought so anyway.
When I'd completed that, the writing block was gone.
See, I wasn't writing then as me, or Philip Jose Farmer, but as a Gilbert Trout.
And I was in his shoes. I had no trouble.
The funny thing about this is, it's a psychological trick that I'm conscious of.
And yet it works.
It's not like I'm trying to trick my unconscious, but I must be doing it one way or another.
I don't know if anybody else has ever broken a writer's block in that manner, but I recommend trying it.
Farmer has also written several books featuring Tarzan or Tarzan-like characters.
Tarzan Alive is Tarzan's biography.
The erotic novel A Feast Unknown and its clean sequels The Mad Goblin and Lord of the Trees
feature thinly veiled versions of Tarzan and Doc Savage.
Lord Tiger, the Opar books, and the Adventures of the Peerless Peer also have Tarzan-like protagonists.
We asked Farmer when he developed his interest in Tarzan.
I first read Tarzan when I guess I was about seven or eight years old, and I became wrapped up in that early age with the words of,
like your eyes swirls.
But when I started college, I kind of lost interest and didn't read him anymore.
But later Farmer picked up on Tarzan again. This time he saw Tarzan in a different light.
When I started reading the books about Tarzan again, and this time, although I still kept a lot of my childhood interest in him,
I began seeing things in Tarzan, for instance, that had not been seen before.
It was not just a child who'd been cast away and raised by great apes and then become a creature of the jungle,
then returned to claim his fortune. He was sort of an archetype of many, many heroes from classical myth.
And now I'm sure that when Burroughs wrote this, he didn't know what he was doing, but he did it unconsciously.
I think it's the creation of Tarzan and the Stroke of Genius.
Burroughs is not a great writer, but he has created a great character just like Aikon and Doyle.
He created a great character, Sherlock Holmes.
Philip Jose Farmer, an author with a seemingly endless supply of unique ideas who appears just now to be gaining widespread acceptance.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show